

Here are my thoughts on financial projection which I suggested in our
discussion the other day.  I will start back at our basic principles
rather than assuming $50000 for 20 students or anything of the sort
and instead derive such information.  Also, these notes are still
somewhat rambling stream of consciousness and will need more work to
tighten them up into a precise estimate.  (And that will also likely
require some data which won't be available until we start operations.)

TUITION

We base our tuition on the following assumptions:

* Students pay a fee per class session, each of which lasts 1 hour.

* The teacher gets paid $45.00 for teaching a single class.

* There is an overhead of $2.00, of which $1.75 goes to the for-profit
  organization and $0.25 to the non-profit organizations(s).

Under these assumptions, the tuition per class depends upon the class
size as follows:

(mapcar (lambda (n)
  	(list n
	      	      (+ 200 (/ 4500 n))))
        (let ((l nil))
	     (dotimes (n 25 (reverse l))
	      	      (setq l (cons (+ n 1) l)))))
 =>
((1 4700)
 (2 2450)
 (3 1700)
 (4 1325)
 (5 1100)
 (6 950)
 (7 842)
 (8 762)
 (9 700)
 (10 650)
 (11 609)
 (12 575)
 (13 546)
 (14 521)
 (15 500)
 (16 481)
 (17 464)
 (18 450)
 (19 436)
 (20 425)
 (21 414)
 (22 404)
 (23 395)
 (24 387)
 (25 380))

Note that this formula reproduces our fee of $5.00 for a class of 15
students and extends it to smaller and larger class sizes.  At one
extreme, this means that, if someone wanted a one-on-ne tutorial, they
could have it, providing they were willing to pay $47.00 per session.
Somewhat less extreme, we might have an advanced class in a
specialized subject with five students paying $11.00 per session.  At
the other extreme, the price drops to $3.80 when we have a class of
25; I stopped the list at that point since I figure that 25 is about
what we would want to cap enrollment at in order to preserve the
dynamics of a small class.

Using such a scale of tuition, we can base our income upon the number
of students enrolled rather than the number of classes taught and not
have to worry about what happens to our finaces if too few students
show up for a class and the like.

SECONDARY ISSUES

Also, there are two secondary issues.  I don't think we need to worry
about them much now in this planning phase, but I'm mentioning them
for completeness as details which we will eventually have to nail
down.  Presumably, we will be better able to answer them when we have
actual experience and can fine-tune our policies based upon how things
turn out.  (So, I guess that the take-away point for now is to be
flexible and open to changing our initial policies.)

When we have a sliding scale based upon class size, there is the
effect of students dropping out.  If we stick with our formula, that
would mean that the price goes up for the rest of the students, which
might have a positive feedback effect.  Alternatively, one could view
this as a discount for the students who stay thanks to the dropouts.
The importance of any of this or related questions will depend on how
large the dropout rate is in practice.  For the MOOC's it's huge.
However, since they're not charging per lesson, this might simply be a
matter to people trying out a class as long as they don't have to pay
for it.  Also, the dynamics are going to be different in a crowd of
1000 than in a group of 15 where everyone gets to know their
classmates personally.

As we discussed earlier, we would want a discount for students who
sign up for multiple classes as an incentive.  What will count for our
overall economics is the average overhead fee per student.  For
instance, suppose that we charge an overhead of $2.25 for classes
purchased individually, but lower it to $1.75 for classes purchased as
a block of 10 or more.  Then, if it should happen that we sell as many
classes individually as in bulk, our average overhead per class would
work out to $2.00 just as above, but there would be a $0.50 bulk
dioscount.  Again, until we start operations, there will be no way of
knowing how many people go for the bulk discount and we would
presumably adjust our prices so that the average price works out to
whatever target we have in mind ($2.00 for now).

INCOME

Based on the above, the for-profit organization would be pulling in
$1.75 (on average) every time a student pays for a class.  For the
purpose of making it easier to keep track of finances, I will
repackage this in terms of average student quarters.

Let's say that a typical class would run 30 sessions per quarter.  A
calendar quarter consist of 13 weeks; excluding a week for holidays
and excluding weekends leaves us with 60 days, so this amounts to
having a class meet every other day.   While thirty sessions would be
a full course, we could just as well have, say, three shourt coourses
of 10 sessions each or some combination of both, etc.

At our rate, that amounts to $60.00 of overhead, with $52.50 going to
the for-profit organization for each student who takes all 30 class
sessions.  By defining average quarterly enrollment (AQE) suitably, we
can easily extend this to other situations.  For instance, if a
student drops out after 10 classes or only takes one 10-session short
course in a semester, we count that as an AQE of 1/3.

Thus, I'll go with the simple formula that our income per quarter is
$52.50 times AQE.  As long as we take our averages appropriately, we
can fold all the factors discussed in this section and the previous
one into how we compute AQE and stick with the formula income = R *
AQE where we take R=$52.50 for the time being.

EXPENDITURES

Since teachers are directly paid out of their share of the tuition
($45.00 per session taught) we only need to consider the remaining
expenses, which will need to come out of the overhead.  I can think of
four types: personel salaries, infrastructure, publicity, and taxes.

Taxes

According to www.smbiz.com//sbrl001.html, corporate income tax in the
lower brackets scales as follows:

$0-49.999 15%
$50,000-74,999 25%
$75,000-99,999 34%

That means that, when we're starting out, we'll be paying the 15%
rate.  Subtracting away 15% of $52.50 leaves us with $44.62 after tax.
In addition, there may be state income taxes, sales tax or VAT
depending on where the students are located, incorporation fees, and
the like.  Figuring those out exactly will require work and knowing
details such as the composition of the student body.  As a ballpark
estimate, the same website suggests 7% as a typical state income tax
rate, which comes out to $3.67 for us.  We can also take care of some
of the other taxes by including them as added costs, i.e. listing our
tuition for a class of 15 students at $5.00 plus taxes.  Thus, I'll
guess that we are left with $40.00 after taxes.

Infrastructure

Since we are not operating a brick-and-mortar campus, we avoid what
would have been a major cost; all that remains is the price of
computers and internet access.  For the initial phase, when we have
say, no more than 100 students enrolled in no more than a dozen
classes, we should be able to make do with something like an linode
instance which goes for $40.00/month.

Later on, we might upgrade to a bigger rented server, operate our own
computer, or some combination of the two.  Suppose that, once the
organization has grown some, we purchase a $10000 server and a
$250/month internet access plan (e.g. 300/65Mbps Verizon FIOS).
Assuming that the computer is good for 5 years, that works out to
$2000 per year, or $500 per quarter for the computer, so we would pay
a total of $1000 per quarter for such an arrangement.

Publicity

In order to get students and teachers to use our website, we will have
to get the word out.  We can start out with a notice on PM and the
help FTA is offering, but pretty soon after that, I expect we'll have
to pay for advertising.  Since I have no idea how much to budget for
marketing, I won't try to guess right now, only note that some funds
will be needed.

Personnel

As we discussed two weeks back, we initially expect to hire a
programmer, system administrator, and business administrator.  In our
last document, the costs were estimated based on a salary of
$2000/person-month, or an annual salary of $24,000, which is low for
such a skilled task ---- a more typical going rate would be twice
that.  (According to glassdoor.com, the median national salary for
programmers and system administrators is $60,000.)  We were expecting
that we might get someone at such a low rate would be because we hire
a student, outsource to a developing nation, or provide equity and an
agreement to raise their pay as soon as the funds come in.  At either
rate, we wouldn't be able to hire anyone full-time at first, so we
would also only be hiring staff part-time.

The other side of this is how much staff we need, which will depend on
the size of the operation.  Let us examine each position individually.

Computer Programmer: At the very beginning, we will be able to make do
with the software we have on PM and FTA mixed in with a few other
packages like Big Blue Button.  However, soon after that, say when we
get to 4 classes / 60 students, we will need to improve the software
to expand further, so there will be the cost of writing that software.
Once we have custom software, there will be the ongoing costs of
fixing bugs and upgrading it to keep it up-to-date.  As budget allows,
we will also pay for adding new features and rewriting the platform.
Thus, we should estimate the fixed costs (i.e. number of person-hours
need to write the program or implement a new feature) and the ongoing
costs (i.e. number of person-hours per week needed to fix bugs and
keep platform up-to-date).

System administrator: This is basically an ongoing cost.  From an
economic point of view, it seems to me that the fundamental question
here is how the number of hours of system administrator work needed
per week varies as a function of number of students enrolled or
classes taught.

Business administrator: As we discussed, in the early stages, there
wouldn't be much to do so we could do it ourselves.  Once we expand to
the point where we have a few hundred students and a couple dozen
teachers, and a considerable amount of cash flowing all over the
place, the logistics are much more complicated so keeping on top of it
will become a full-time job for someone.  As a rough first guess,
let's say that each 100 students enrolled would require a half-hour a
day of administrator time.

BALANCING THE BOOKS

Now that we've had a look at the incomes and the expenses, it's time
to see how the ends meet.  We estimated that, on average, we would
pull in $40.00 per quarter after taxes for each student enrolled.  Let
us express our expenses in terms of this AQE unit.

Linode access at $40/month works out to 3 AQE.  The plan where we buy
an expensive computer and fast internet access works out to 25 AQE.

The equivalent of a full-time employee depends upon the wages, so we
will repeat the calculation for the three rates we mentioned:

(mapcar (lambda (n) (/ n 160))
	'(25000 40000 60000))

$25,000/yr 156 AQE
$40,000/yr 250 AQE
$60,000/yr 375 AQE

Using these figures, we can put our estimate of a half hour of old
fashioned administrator time for each 100 students in prespective.  A
half-hour is 1/16th of an 8 hour day.  Hence, we divide the last
column by 16 to see how many students' fees are needed to pay for the
administrator:

(mapcar (lambda (n) (/ n 16))
        '(156 250 375))
  => (9 15 23)

Even with the $60,000 salary, this would mean that 23% of the overhead
fee (after taxes) went to paying for administration, which sounds
alright.  If, however, it turns out that I badly underestimated and it
really needs an hour a day of administrator work, that would be 46% of
the fee for an expensive administrator, so we had better tell the
administrator that he's not going to get a raise past $40,000 until he
gets more efficient at his job in such a case!

Likewise, if we had an estimate of how many hours of system
administrator and computer programmer time were required per 100
students, we could run similar arguments.  However, even without these
figures, we can run the argument in reverse to put an upper bound on
how much time per day per 100 students we can afford to have these
people spending.

Similarly, for advertising.  The question I posed earlier could be
rephrased as "How much we need to spend in order to get 100 students
to sign up for classes?"  Dividing that figure by the amount those
students bring in would then tell us what percent of the student's
fees would be needed to recover the cost of advertising needed to
attract those students.

Finally, once all those numbers get taken into account, we see what is
left over as profit at the end of the quarter.

